I'm talking to Rob Butler.
Are you familiar with the Volcroft's book, Speak to Memories?
Yes.
It's been ages since I read it.
It was a wonderful book, yeah.
There certainly are some resonances out there in terms of what I think you're trying to, what you're hoping to accomplish with the Volcroft.
It's quite a striking departure for you.
Oh, it is.
based on some of the reviews that I went, I think you recognized the risk involved.
Poor Gail didn't get it at all.
It leads me to something.
The book reviews the reviewers in a very personal way.
Inevitably so.
Of course, they know more about that.
I don't talk or write about other reviewers anyway.
But I thought that Tristan's piece in The Times
And I'm wondering if it's breaking down according to gender.
Interestingly enough, if it's breaking down according to gender, you decided to do powder trans.
I'm finding that women like this book a lot more consistently.
The people that I think will not get the book.
are those people, and this could be male or female, but in a hunch it's more men than women.
If you do not have already your own personality, which a book critic cannot use his intellect to separate himself from, if you do not already have a very serious and loving appreciation of women and their bodies, then you're not going to get this book at all.
And that's where I found that the reviews that have been baffled are hostile to the book, have broken down, and it's been mostly men.
You know, they just don't know what all the lyricism's about.
They find the book, you know, too overheated, too lyrical, and repetitive.
Now, if they see this book as repetitive,
They missed the humor, too.
Yeah, they missed the humor as well.
Yeah.
I read the years before I looked at the book, and neither one of them mentioned the humor.
That's true.
Even Chris was wondering, you know, and thank God Chris understood a lot about this book.
He did these bad aspects of it.
Treat me with respect, too, which is very important.
He did.
He did it as well.
He did, too.
She treated me with respect.
She didn't understand what the heck.
She thought this was, you know, I don't know why.
And it's interesting.
A woman who is so smart and careful as a reviewer, the deep personalness of her reaction is really indicated by the absolutely false assertion that most of these italicized whisperings from the women
are in praise of Ira's performance.
That was a very odd thing for her to assert, because there's almost none of that in what the women talk about.
You know, it's really quite different from that.
So anyway, I knew this was going to happen.
You know, you can't write vividly and deeply about sexuality without the book having a kind of Rorschach effect, you know, in a certain way.
But that goes with the territory.
I've not been one to share risks, as you know.
Tell me about it.
How long have you been working on this book?
Is this pre-seed work on it?
In a sense, I've been working on it all my life.
As far as sitting around and actually writing it, it was about three years.
Interestingly enough, Nick, I didn't even conceive this as a book until after I wrote A Good Step from Strange Mountain.
And it was because of, directly because of, interestingly enough, the access that I suddenly found in my artistic unconscious to women's voices.
In good sense, seven of those fifteen pieces are written in the voices of women, and literally every woman I have ever talked to who's read the book remarks on the authenticity of those women's voices.
Suddenly, when I had access in my unconscious and my imagination to women's voices from the inside, that's what let me write about male heterosexuality.
That, you know, Ira, like myself, strictly heterosexual, but it was only when I and Ira couldn't find the women's voices inside us that I could really talk about and communicate more.
completely the whole essence of sexuality, because it's the ultimate kind of intimacy.
Again, I don't want it to appear that we're rebutting her review, but let's use it as what she does.
No, no, no.
But she does seem to suggest
that iris is living in a fantasy world but i don't think that this is fantasy i mean certainly we're daydream we weren't thinking it and i was still reliving it i mean that happens all the time striking things i could walk out in an airport and then smaller that gas on back of my aircraft exactly that absolutely and i mean i can feel the heat i can feel that
I can smell the grinning tires on the light neck and, you know, the whole thing.
But just a sharp little smell like that.
Coming up the whole time of your life, a whole place, a personality, an intimacy, of course.
Strong and indulging in that.
Absolutely.
I don't think it's fantasy, for se.
No.
It's odd.
I don't know why the book, as with any work of art, is exaggerated and heightened in a sense, you know?
It's like people expect to know, watch him brush his teeth and eat his dinner and think about work and so forth.
That's a requirement.
But it is about that part of human beings, men.
that has an ongoing and inevitable focus on intimacy and the yearning for intimacy.
It's very realistic in that sense because that's the inner landscape of men in regards to the women that they have loved and continue to love.
That's the territory that I wanted to eliminate, which is rarely eliminated.
It's, in fact, the impulse that men have to desire women.
It's to, in fact, what seems to outsiders to be only over inconsequential or casual things.
That impulse has been, in the media and the pop culture, has been trivialized almost exclusively.
It is treated like a trivial, childish, you know, objectifying impulse.
And in some men, many men, perhaps, that's true.
But for many other men,
It is a deeply serious impulse.
It is the impulse to cosmic connection, to the mysteries of unique individual personality, and that's what the book is trying to get at.
I think that the success, and I don't mean commercial or critical, but we wait for ourselves, and we're happy with it.
Right, but certainly you were pleased with things, isn't it?
Yes.
And where seven voices were female voices, did that embolden you, you think, to believe that this was possible?
Absolutely.
It was the only thing that made the book possible to me.
If I were, as a creator of this book, limited to the male voice and the male perspective,
I could not have understood the complexities that I think the book understands.
who I've talked to perhaps three times or so.
Mary Gordon, she said repeatedly how difficult it is for her to do, as a writer, male sexuality.
Yes.
She did have a man in a couple of novellas, but she tried.
Right.
But clearly this couldn't intimidate you in any way.
No, it would have some years, several years ago.
I mean,
It's been an evolutionary thing, my coming to be able to write this book.
You know, it's taken 49 years of loving a lot of women and listening to them very closely.
And a certain amount of plumbing deeper and deeper into what I've referred to as the artistic unconscious, the artistic unconscious, in order to finally make my way down to this depth.
with enough technique and craft and enough life experience to pull all that together.
You know, it's a coming together of a lot of forces inside me and inside my work to be able to write this book.
It is, by the way, the first book of a trilogy of novels about human sexuality.
Ira will not go forward as a character.
which I'm tentatively calling Now the Silence, will be set in Vietnam.
Can't get away from it.
No, no.
And of course, I don't go to Vietnam with the same intent that most people do.
It's not a political thing.
It's just a vivid, wonderful place.
My youth in Paris or whatever.
Saigon is an extraordinary city.
The people are remarkably...
And I just got back from Vietnam.
Of our lifetime.
Not incidentally, right?
Of our generation.
Exactly.
But, um... You think so?
I've been 69, 70, 71.
71, right?
Yeah, I am.
But I just got back from Vietnam.
It's been a month there.
It's still... Saigon is still the most wonderful city.
Yeah, I think everybody's calling it Saigon.
There's no resemblance to a communist country whatsoever.
Really?
You cannot find an image of Marx or Marx.
Nothing.
That's exactly right.
They have always been incredibly pragmatic people.
And as soon as the failures of the communist system are clear to the Vietnamese, they changed it.
You know?
The peasants own the land now, in perpetuity, the rights of the land.
The government technically owns it, but the crown technically owns all the land in England, you know?
So, it's a remarkable thing, and, you know, with this lifting of the embargo, I think, we're on the right path.
Let's get back to it.
Anyway, so now we... So, but Saigon is, to my senses, what London is to my mind.
And it's a new quote.
There you go.
I'm always seeing my own story in my head.
Oh, yeah, of course.
Let me just go off that bit.
Worcester, of course, too.
Worcester's my base.
Your base, yeah.
So, novel silence is going to be actually, you know, I've always recoiled, as you know, from the label of Vietnam novelist, which is a
I may have said to you before, to me, it sounds like calling Monet a lily pad painter, you know.
But this will be, in fact, a novel about human sexuality.
The second in the series, an American GI, former GI, goes back in late 93, and meets and falls deeply in love with a beautiful Vietnamese woman in her late 20s.
How old is that?
He was there in 1966.
I'm going to tell you something about the book, which I don't think I want to read yet.
He's in Vietnam in 1966 and comes home.
Goes back in September of 1993.
Where does he go back?
Recapture?
Yeah, yeah.
He had a kind of, yeah, he had a kind of, right, midlife crisis, whatever.
Relationships fell apart and so forth.
They make this beautiful woman, like twice, and they fall in love.
And they fall in love, by the way, in a way, you know, they whisper is not a unified field theory of sexuality.
Ira, at the end of the book, is left in a place where he comes to realize he's not whole.
Well, this relationship, and now the silence, is a very deep one and seems mutually exclusive, even, in a way that Ira has not found.
Well, they passionately consummate their relationship and begin then to go through the bureaucracy there to find a way to marry and take her back to the States.
And in that process, they discover that she is his daughter.
Uh-huh.
I won't use this at all, of course, but, you know.
I'm probably not going to keep a secret to that eventually, but right now it's true as Russell wrote a book.
But think of the metaphorical implications of that.
Have I ever searched that?
My third, the third novel trilogy will be in the voice of Karen Granger.
You have this whole thing straight out, then, pretty well figured.
What are you trying to say in the three books?
What is... Well, no, yeah.
That's what I mean.
Is it three aspects of sexuality, or is it just... We're moving toward a... We're moving on, you know, thematically... The deep seriousness of the male impulse to love a lot of women is rendered in this book, and I respond how long.
Now the silence is a relationship that in all ways is whole, except the terrible tragic horror.
Karen Granger intrudes me, and I don't want to look ahead too much yet, but she will be moving even, you know, with her I will find out whether such a relationship is possible.
a kind of relationship that would be... This is why I don't like the tape all the time, because it's a notebook, you're always playing, and I'm sure it's on tape, but you're saying an exploration of human sexuality or male sexuality?
A human.
Yeah, sure.
Even they whisper, transcend male sexuality, you know, that's the hook.
But with those women's voices, it really is, you know, and even beyond sexuality, human intimacy,
which is perhaps an even deeper issue.
Tell me about the risks.
Were you cognizant of the risks you were taking?
Oh, sure.
Absolutely.
It's not imaginative.
It really did change your life.
It did, although this book was virtually done by the time... But all of a sudden now there are new expectations placed out there.
Yeah, sure.
Well, you know, except that I've always placed the highest expectations on myself.
If the expectation of the poetry is that I continue to start repeating myself now, playing a case, then I defy that expectation.
Another good question.
Yeah.
This is what you get when you interview me early in the tour here.
So I've always placed the highest demand on myself possible.
When I was writing an obscurity,
So it's not going to change now.
If anything, winning the poetry, the monkey's off my back.
You know, I don't have to, I don't have to, to, not that I ever would have, but any tiny impulse to try to curry favor is gone.
And I'm happy now to write the books that are the best and deepest and most challenging books I can.
Do you feel that he'll do stories?
Oh, yes.
I have two books of short stories in my head that I will be doing.
In fact, I'll probably slip one of those in between Now the Silence and the third book in the trilogy.
But this is interesting.
This hasn't really been stated yet.
You've already done a trilogy, of course.
Yes.
So tell me about the work.
I don't know.
I like the...
I like the notion of, I mean, the landscape of my imagination is kind of a whole, so that the books have interconnections anyway.
And as in The Whistler, for instance, that Sharon Granger is a very important character.
Not many words have been on her.
She's kind of like the Holy Grail.
sexually.
And yet, when I created her, she has a kind of resonance on into my imagination.
And I get intrigued about going back to her, so... You mentioned the voices were there, and also the
the resolution that you can resolve that you could do it.
But I'm wondering, is this a plotted thing, or is this one of these organic kinds of decisions?
No, it's an organic thing.
In fact, I distinguish between, for my students, between literature and non-literature on that very basis, that non-literature you can identify by the fact that the writer
knows before the object is created the effect the idea the theme the attitude the you know position that he wants the book to have and it constructs a thing to do that the artistic impulse impulse toward literature is that the that the writer has an in koa sense of the world's order behind the chaos
a vision of order.
But the writer doesn't really understand that vision, doesn't really quite know what it is until he's actually created the object.
So the actual creation of the art object is as much an act of exploration as it is of expression.
And so it's not a plotted out
I mean, do you agree with that he doesn't create the statue?
He takes it away, yes.
And he doesn't know quite what it looks like until all this stuff's gone.
Yeah, it's there.
He's there, yeah.
He's just kind of unlayering it, I guess.
Right.
But beyond that, I would say that he doesn't even know what it quite looks like until he's finished it.
Do you write physically?
Sure.
I mean, that book was done in two years.
Word processor longhand?
Word processor.
So there's no way to determine how many drafts or variants there are of this thing?
Not anymore.
My first five novels were all written on legal pads by hand, and four of them on my lap in the Long Island Railroad.
So those have lots of that kind of stuff.
Yeah, you're right.
That is lost too.
Do you write an idea to entertain or instruct or all of these things?
None of those things.
I go back to what I just said about knowing the effects you wish to have before the object is created.
Intent to entertain or to instruct are both
preconceived effects.
If I wrote books with those intents, I could not create art.
I could not create a deep... I could not find my way into that place in myself that I have to go to if create a book is complex and challenging.
No.
I write in order to not only to express but to figure out and understand what it is that I see
at the deepest levels about the way the world works or fails to.
Clearly, you're writing with the idea that this will be read by other people.
Oh, sure.
I don't know what the point is.
No, no, that's true.
It's not just for myself.
I mean, because the seeming corollary of that is, well, I just write to please myself and everybody else be damned, because that's an easy corollary to make here.
You know, some writers may take that posture.
But no, no, no, I think the impulse to communicate that, to express it in a way that others will understand in that non-rational way that we understand art, I mean, that impulse is absolutely as strong as the impulse to explore.
Sure.
So there isn't a Bob Butler reader out there.
Again, I don't have a specific reader in mind.
I articulate this stuff in a way to make it clear to others who those others are, I don't know.
For instance, I would hate to think about a reader
in the Pacific because, again, I might start shaping the work to fit that reader.
When I was in Saigon, you read, did you read all of Quixanta?
Remember the story of Crickets?
We had the large, strong, slow, buckled crickets and the little fast, wily fire crickets.
You know, in a classroom, I would resist
We all know what those crickets stood for, because it was noted that everybody, even the kids who had the charcoal crickets, rooted for the little ones.
It was themselves, you know.
Well, when I was in Saigon, there was a guy selling lapel pins on the street.
And I would say hello to him in Vietnamese every day.
We had a nice sort of hello sort of relationship, just exchanging words in Vietnamese.
He was in his mid-40s.
He was missing his left arm.
While I was there, crickets had been translated by a Vietnamese, actually a Vietnamese government official, a guy in the foreign ministry of all things, a very literate man, loved my book.
He translated crickets, and it was published while I was there.
in a weekly magazine that I got.
This button seller hailed me, called me over, waving the magazine.
Turns out he's a former Viet Cong soldier.
Lost his arm in war.
And charming man.
He just loved this story.
And he laughed at a rich, deep laugh.
He says, you know what I like the best?
He says, when the man said that they always liked, you know, because I used to fight crickets too when I was a kid.
The part about them always rooting for the fire crickets, he said, that's true.
That's the way it happens.
And he laughed his feet laughing.
Here I am speaking to a living literary symbol.
You know, the man who's...
The very essence was what was suggested by the literature.
And he's not thinking, you know, intellectually, abstractly about the story.
He's responding in a visceral way to the very simple... Is that a Vietnamese edition of yours?
Of the stories.
The whole book has not been translated there.
This was one story that was translated and published in a weekly magazine there.
Was this under your auspices, or was it a pirated job?
Oh, yes.
How was the translation?
As far as I could tell, it was good.
Yeah, I used to be fluent.
I'm not so fluent anymore, but it looked like a good translation.
There was a pilot in a vision.
I mean, within a block and a half of the Majestic Hotel where I stayed, I found a combination pirate book operation, bookstore, and ice cream shop.
And there was an ice cream shop as well.
And I met my local pirate.
He gave me some free ice cream and a free copy of my book.
Yeah.
But it was really well done.
It was done in the... Nice.
When you were in Vietnam, when you were working as a translator, and you came home, where did the writing start?
Let's get a little biographical.
Before I went to Vietnam, I was a playwright.
I got a master's degree in playwriting.
And what did I do?
I was a terrible playwright.
You never see what I want.
No, it was in the theater department, actually.
And then Vietnam turned me into fiction writers, or made me realize that I'd been a fiction writer all along.
And so I came home in the 70s, early 72, and began writing fiction.
Did a lot of bad stuff, teaching myself how to write.
and finally started publishing in 1981, publishing books.
I mean, is it true that the first novel was rejected?
Twenty-one times, yeah.
By the way, all six of the back of those books are now back in print.
I think all of them.
All of the paperbacks, yeah.
They did a beautiful job.
Can you smell the flowers?
Yeah, they are.
It looks like a string.
Yeah, really.
Henry Holt's a wonderful publisher.
A wonderful publisher.
My story is I was orphaned.
I was under contract to rent a house.
Oh, were you?
Was that book?
I know Ellen Goodman once said when I interviewed her that winning a full of supplies meant one thing for sure is that now she knows how an obituary is going to start.
Yeah, right, right.
The fourth through the eight words of the obituary already written, thank you.
But I guess in a larger sense, does it place on your shoulders any degree of responsibility or to make you feel or... My responsibility has always been to the work and to my vision, and I have always been the most demanding of taskmen in that regard.
So in that respect, what it has done for me, blessed
It has found my readership.
I've always thought that my books were not only serious literature, but also extremely readable.
And it's always puzzled me why I have not broken through to some larger readership.
And the Pulitzer has simply made people who I've always had confidence in.
Confidence has been rewarded.
who simply picked up my book and read it, which would like my books.
I've had a kind of a cult following for some years.
You were waiting to meet.
Yeah.
That's right.
My readership and I have finally come around the corner on the same street corner at the same time.
We look at each other, we smile at each other and we say, oh,
There's something here.
I'm convinced that Louise earlier, she was, you know, when she won the National Book Critics Circle, that launched her whole career.
I mean, when they went back and sent that book, and this, you know, I interviewed her.
You know, she couldn't get her book published.
Finally, then it wins the NBCC, and now she's wonderful.
I've interviewed her after that.
I really go for these classy books.
Yeah, I thought when you asked about computers, I thought my little... I bought a gateway handbook.
Do you like it?
It's fabulous.
Two and three-quarter pounds.
Full-size keyboard.
Wow.
What's the... 40 megabyte hard drive.
And I've got a little external, again, light, external floppy drive, so I can take that or not take it, you know, or it's easy to transfer stuff.
Anyway, I've been carrying that around.
I've been working on...
Tray tables and airplanes and hotel rooms.
How long does it keep in charge?
I can't pardon me for going out for this thing.
About two hours.
So it's wonderful.
Anyway, I've been working in Saigon.
I was on the fifth floor of the Majestic Hotel, looking at over the Saigon River, writing a screenplay.
Hollerstone's production company, Ixtlan, has optioned a book, and they hired me to write a screenplay.
That's great.
What do they do to start production?
Hard to say.
Screenplays do the middle of March, the first draft, and then the second draft will be due a couple of months after that or whatever.
This is where the background in drama, I think, is invaluable.
And according to publishers weekly, I can't tell you this, but they can.
Wayne Wayne, who's going to direct.
He's the guy that's... I saw that at some point.
Joy Luck Club.
Yeah.
Probably so.